---
title:  Live Mesh is back!
date:  2010-08-27 15:11:12 -04:00
permalink:  "/2010/08/27/live-mesh-is-back/"
categories:
- Gadget
tags:  []
---
<p>Live Mesh is back baby!</p>  <p>The service that has been in beta for around two years, known as <a href="http://mesh.com">Windows Live Mesh</a> was packaged in Live Essentials 2011 as Live Sync.</p>  <p>Microsoft <a href="http://windowsteamblog.com/windows_live/b/windowslive/archive/2010/08/27/windows-live-sync-to-be-named-windows-live-mesh.aspx">came back to the original name</a>:&#160; Windows Live Mesh.</p>  <p>Thanks to <a href="http://www.zdnet.com/blog/microsoft">Mary-Jo Foley</a> for <a href="http://www.zdnet.com/blog/microsoft/windows-live-whiplash-live-sync-reverts-back-to-live-mesh/7240">digging that information</a>!</p>  <p>&#160;</p>  <p>I’ve been using Live Mesh since day one and I think it’s a fantastic service.&#160; For those of you who don’t know what it is, it’s a Microsoft service with a cloud component and a local (desktop or mobile) component and it basically syncs stuff from your machine to the cloud.&#160; The original service syncs folders, so you could easily setup a few folders on your machine to sync with folders in the cloud.</p>  <p>The UI is easy, everything syncs seamlessly, it’s great.&#160; On top of that, you can use a few tricks, for instance, you can sync your favorites (which are files in a <em>My Documents</em> folder), so your favorites can follow you from a device to another.&#160; You can also share folders with other users, which I never tried.</p>  <p>Now the real power of that technology comes from the architecture and the possibility to build apps on top of it.&#160; The model is that there’s a local component which mirrors Live Mesh in the cloud ; when you need a resource or you want to update a resource, you do it locally and Live Mesh synchronizes the resources for you.&#160; This provides a very simple architecture where Live Mesh abstracts the synchronization logic.</p>  <p>There was a Live Mesh SDK allowing you to develop applications by talking to this local version of Live Mesh.&#160; There was even talks at PDCs about deploying applications using Live Mesh.&#160; I don’t know how much of this is moving forward with Live Essentials 2011.</p>  <p>An issue I see with this service is that it relies on Windows Live.&#160; I therefore cannot use Live Mesh to build an Enterprise Application.&#160; I don’t know if we’ll see a more Azure-flavored version of Live Mesh in the near future…</p>